---
title: The Rise of Anti-Liberalism in Tech
url: https://www.stephendiehl.com/posts/illiberal/
published: "2023-11-01T00:00:00Z"
feed: diehl
guid: https://www.stephendiehl.com/posts/illiberal/
---

# The Rise of Anti-Liberalism in Tech

Silicon Valley, once a beacon of technological optimism and innovation, is undergoing a troubling transformation. The region that once embodied the ideals of humanism, progress, and the pursuit of a better world has become a far different place as of late. The brightest minds once went into tech, bound by the shared aspiration to actualize a future reminiscent of the idyllic post-scarcity society portrayed in our shared science fiction narratives. This was a world where technology eliminated material want, liberated individuals from the shackles of laborious toil, and fostered an equitable global community build on enduring peace, prosperity and abundance. Yet, the arc of history within Silicon Valley has sharply deviated from this lofty vision into far darker aspirations. What was once a beacon of innovation and humanism is now perilously morphing into the template for a cyberpunk dystopia. In this dismal tableau, power concentrates in the hands of narcissistic oligarchs, technology is wielded as an instrument of control rather than liberation, and the principles of liberal democracy are systematically eroded.

This transformation marks the rise of illiberalism in Silicon Valley. Illiberalism, in this context, refers to a political and social philosophy that rejects or undermines core tenets of liberal democracy, such as individual rights, civil liberties, and the rule of law. It often manifests as a concentration of power in the hands of a few, erosion of democratic institutions, and the suppression of dissent or alternative viewpoints.

The seeds of this illiberal transformation are insidiously sown in the Valley's pivot from idealistic innovation to aggressive monopolistic dominance and unchecked data aggregation. Companies that once championed the egalitarian ethos of democratizing access to information have become the gatekeepers of the vast digital landscape, exercising oligopolistic control over the internet's essential infrastructure. In this new paradigm, the flow of information is subject to the whims of a few tech titans, whose priorities often align more closely with profit maximization and market expansion than with fostering an open and free society.

A singularly most aggregegious example of this illiberal shift is embodied in figures like Elon Musk, who has increasingly embraced the idea of a tech-led autocracy. Musk's acquisition and subsequent management of Twitter demonstrates a willingness to wield unchecked power over a major platform for public discourse. His arbitrary decision-making, from suspending journalists' accounts to altering platform policies without transparent processes, exemplifies the dangers of concentrated power in the tech industry. Musk's vision of a "technoking" who can unilaterally shape the digital public square represents a stark departure from democratic principles and a move towards a tech-driven authoritarianism where the whims of a single individual can have far-reaching societal impacts.

The culture of Silicon Valley, once imbued with the spirit of optimistic creativity, has been increasingly co-opted by an ethos of extreme libertarianism. This ideological shift is characterized by a disdain for regulatory oversight and a fervent belief in the primacy of the individual übermensch—the tech visionary whose unmitigated genius is presumed to be the salve for societal ills. In reality, this glorified individualism engenders a climate where ethical considerations are secondary to the pursuit of technological dominance. The resultant products and services—ranging from pervasive surveillance tools to opaque algorithmic systems—reflect a troubling disregard for the societal and moral implications of their deployment.

The rise of neo-reactionary thought in Silicon Valley presents a grave danger to the foundations of liberal democracy. This ideology, which rejects modern democratic principles in favor of authoritarian governance models, has found fertile ground in the tech industry's disillusionment with traditional political structures. Proponents of neo-reactionary ideas advocate for a return to hierarchical societal structures, often cloaked in the language of "effective governance" or "technocratic efficiency." This mindset dovetails dangerously with the tech industry's data-driven approach, potentially leading to the creation of systems that prioritize control and predictability over individual liberty and democratic participation. The allure of these ideas to tech elites poses a significant threat, as it could result in the development of technologies that reinforce social stratification, limit personal freedoms, and enable unprecedented levels of surveillance and manipulation. The convergence of neo-reactionary philosophy with tech could pave the way for a dystopian future where a technocratic elite wields unchecked power.

Simultaneously, the sociopolitical fabric in which these companies operate has deteriorated. The monopolistic practices of Big Tech firms stymie competition and suppress innovation, effectively disenfranchising smaller players and diverse voices. As these conglomerates grow in power and influence, their leaders increasingly resemble the oligarchs of a cyberpunk dystopia: individuals who operate beyond the reach of traditional checks and balances. With immense wealth and resources at their disposal, these tech magnates wield disproportionate influence over political processes, often shaping policies in ways that entrench their dominance and perpetuate the socio-economic divides they claim to bridge.

The rapid ascendency of dangerous ideas like "effective accelerationism" (e/acc) tied to the dark philsophy of Nick Land represents a particularly insidious threat to the ideals of human flourishing and social progress. This nihilistic philosophy embraces the darkest aspects of technological advancement, advocating for the acceleration of capitalism and technological growth to their most extreme conclusions, regardless of the human or environmental cost. Accelerationism rejects the notion of measured progress or ethical considerations in favor of a reckless pursuit of change, often glorifying the potential collapse of current social structures. This dangerous ideology has found fertile ground in the tech industry, where the relentless pursuit of innovation can easily be divorced from moral considerations because those building the software are isolated from the consequences of their actions.

At its core, accelerationism is a regression to pre-modern ideas of social stratification and determinism, cloaked in the language of futurism. It dismisses the value of social justice, human agency and democratic processes, instead embracing a fatalistic view where technological and economic forces are seen as inevitable and desirable, even if they lead to societal collapse or extreme inequality. This philosophy poses a significant danger to the foundations of liberal democracy and human rights, as it undermines efforts to create a more equitable and just society. By glorifying unchecked technological progress and market forces, accelerationism threatens to exacerbate existing social divides and create new forms of oppression and exploitation.

And at the broadest level the ascendency of Trumpism has brutally exposed the naked will to power that undergirds much of contemporary political and technological landscapes, stripping away the veneer of idealism that long cloaked Silicon Valley and the American political ethos. What was once a region and an industry imbued with utopian visions of global connectivity and democratic empowerment now finds itself tainted by a resurgence of pre-modern tribalism and crass self-interest. The illusion of a technology-driven future that could transcend petty politics and foster a new era of enlightened, collaborative progress has been brutally shattered. In its place, we see a brutal power struggle, where digital platforms are leveraged to amplify misinformation, manipulate public opinion, and deepen societal fractures. Trumpism’s embrace of the most cynical forms of manipulation and divisiveness has dragged Silicon Valley into the mud, coercing it to engage in battles of influence and control that echo the darker chapters of human history.

History will remember Trump as a witless moron whose guiding philosophy is devoid of any coherence or principle beyond the aggrandizement of his own ego. He is a political arsonist, the Nero of American politics, who captured a political party and turned into a cult of personality devoid of any intellectual substance or principle. Trump's ascendancy represents a stark departure from the aspirations of rational discourse and meritocratic innovation that once characterized Silicon Valley's ethos. American politics has been besieged by a chaotic ethos where truth is negotiable, and power is wielded through brute force and deception. This has pulled technologists into the orbit of a demagogue who believes in nothing but his own prowess, undermining the hard-won trust and idealism that were painstakingly built over decades. In becoming arenas for the exercise of such raw and unprincipled power, Silicon Valley’s platforms—initially conceived as tools for enlightenment and progress—have become instruments of obfuscation and regression, perpetuating the very pre-modern conflicts they were meant to transcend.

A better future is still possible, but it requires a rejection of regressive dangerous ideas of strongmen, techno-authoritarianism and accelerationism; and a return to the democratic humanist values that made technology, progress and democracy possible.
